All right, I'll wait until it turns 2 p.m. All
NOTE CONF
right.
So it's 2 p.m. Welcome.
NOTE CONF
Welcome to semester 1 2026.
I suppose.
NOTE CONF
Those who are coming in, settle down fast.
So my name is Arun Konourtu.
NOTE CONF
I'm an associate professor in the Department of Data Science
and AI.
NOTE CONF
Uh, I've been in the faculty for more than 16
years.
NOTE CONF
I've been teaching this unit for a long time.
Um, So I become aware of uh the course progression
NOTE CONF
in computer science in general.
So I suppose one of the things, please settle down,
NOTE CONF
settle down quickly.
It's always nice to have students in.
NOTE CONF
Alright, so Quiet, settle down.
All right, so let's basically start this unit.
NOTE CONF
So I just wanted to say that you might have
various impressions, baggages coming into this unit.
NOTE CONF
Now, is the unit easy?
Well, it's a specialist unit with advanced in its title,
NOTE CONF
if it's easy, and we're, we're teaching this in supposedly
the world ranked, some of the world ranked university, whatever
NOTE CONF
the rankings are.
If it, if it's advanced unit is easy, then There's
NOTE CONF
something wrong, isn't it?
Well, is it hard?
NOTE CONF
Well, I promise you that if you do the right
things, not sort of.
NOTE CONF
Push things, procrastinate, do things at the right time.
The pace is perfect.
NOTE CONF
I've been doing this since 2018.
And I've, I have a long experience to tell that
NOTE CONF
something has changed in the recent years.
I think it largely has got to do with your
NOTE CONF
ability to focus on the content in a, in a
steady steady way.
NOTE CONF
So I'm not going to give you a lecture about,
um, at least waste the lecture talking about the learning
NOTE CONF
habits you should have, but what all of you who
are here already are doing the great, doing a good
NOTE CONF
thing.
It's a fantastic start.
NOTE CONF
You're here because you wanted to learn.
And we'll jump straight into it.
NOTE CONF
Keep doing this.
Don't drop off, OK?
NOTE CONF
So if you're struggling, come to the, so I have
help desk workshops.
NOTE CONF
They're optional.
There's one tomorrow, although it won't show it on your,
NOTE CONF
in your timetable in week one.
I will be open for a sit down please.
NOTE CONF
I'll be open for.
Guiding your learning tomorrow at 10 to 11, go and
NOTE CONF
check the Muru um link for the Zoom link that
you could that you could sign in, uh, sign into
NOTE CONF
and then have a conversation with me.
I'll guide you through the learning every week.
NOTE CONF
After the lecture, the idea would be, listen to the
lecture, come to the, come to these guided sessions, do
NOTE CONF
some self-study, go to the labs next week and.
Iron out any difficulties, and if you keep to this
NOTE CONF
habit, this unit is not just.
Um, a technical unit will be a fun unit.
NOTE CONF
Presumably you're doing computer science because you wanted to do
some, some under the hood stuff.
NOTE CONF
Settle down, please, for those who have just come in.
So, Quiet.
NOTE CONF
So for those who do the right thing, I think
it's going to be fun.
NOTE CONF
One thing I would promise is everything, every week you'll
be learning one algorithm slash data structure, so 12, really,
NOTE CONF
12 things to learn.
And if, and what we're learning is going to be
NOTE CONF
something that has a real world application.
So it's actually.
NOTE CONF
An algorithm that's used in some real world things, and
each week has a, has a different flavour to it.
NOTE CONF
So we're starting with Gus fields that algorithm.
And it kind of this week and next week, we
NOTE CONF
would, we're going to be talking about exact pattern matching.
Starting with Z algorithm and then doing Boo More if
NOTE CONF
time permitting, I'll, I'll do KMP, but really the, the
real algorithm that is implemented in every search system is
NOTE CONF
Boo Moore, so that's the trophy for the um exact
pattern matching problem.
NOTE CONF
That's the high water mark to achieve.
All right, so some source material that you have here,
NOTE CONF
it's a book, you don't have to buy the book,
but then you'll be provided with material and slides and
NOTE CONF
discussions with me, which will cover all the things that
you should know for at least for the assessment.
NOTE CONF
So what is the problem?
I'm going to jump straight into it and let's see
NOTE CONF
if we can have some interaction while going.
If you have any doubts, raise your hand, and I'll
NOTE CONF
sort of take that interaction.
If it's going too long, I'll say we'll have a
NOTE CONF
conversation offline.
So I'll, I'll wait after the lecture outside if you
NOTE CONF
have to clarify anything, but I really like the interaction.
I really like this, every one of you to sort
NOTE CONF
of interact with me.
If there's something not clear, all it takes is for
NOTE CONF
you to just say, Arun, I don't quite understand what
that was, and we'll, we'll sort of, um, tease things
NOTE CONF
out.
So what is the problem?
NOTE CONF
The exact pattern matching problem is you're given two strings.
One's a text, one's a pattern, and the question is,
NOTE CONF
can you find me all the locations in the text
where the pattern appears is the problem.
NOTE CONF
Very clear, and essentially you do this all the time
when you're on a long text page, you're searching for
NOTE CONF
a word, you say control F, you type a word,
and suddenly you, some, all the parts of the text
NOTE CONF
with the word lights up, right?
Highlights, and that's basically a pattern matching problem in that
NOTE CONF
you kind of interface when you're doing searching.
And if you're doing command line, you do grip.
NOTE CONF
Global regular expression print, that's what GREP is.
And then you say GREP something.
NOTE CONF
There are regular expressions there, but let's say if you're
doing just a uh a concrete crisp, crystal crystal clear
NOTE CONF
pattern without any regular expressions, you kind of go and
search for it, it finds you that, that's the algorithm.
NOTE CONF
Now, what you see here is a text, some text
that I created.
NOTE CONF
And you're searching for the pattern ABA in that text
containing 12 letters, 12 characters, and you can see that
NOTE CONF
it appears at position 3, position 7, and position 10
in the text.
NOTE CONF
Can you stare at that?
So the answer.
NOTE CONF
The answer to the problem would be positions 37, and
10 because ABA appears as a substring in the larger
NOTE CONF
text.
Is the problem very clear to all of you?
NOTE CONF
OK.
There's no questions there.
NOTE CONF
OK, so fantastic.
Let's move on.
NOTE CONF
What would be a naive algorithm?
OK, I've written the algorithm there, but if you have
NOTE CONF
to solve this problem, how would you solve it?
Anyone?
NOTE CONF
All right, feel, feel, yep, yes sir.
So you have Stream and here's your desires and search.
NOTE CONF
Mhm.
We go to the first character.
NOTE CONF
Mhm.
First the matches.
NOTE CONF
Mhm.
Fails move.
NOTE CONF
again.
Fantastic.
NOTE CONF
So the suggestion was that if you have a text
of length, let's say N in characters and pattern of
NOTE CONF
M characters, you're putting the pattern underneath the text at
each position, and in each position you're comparing.
NOTE CONF
One character that's opposing in the text with the pattern.
So does the first, when you start this algorithm, first
NOTE CONF
character is matched with the first character.
If it passes, if it matches, then the second character,
NOTE CONF
same as the second, the third same as the third,
until you get a mismatch.
NOTE CONF
Let's say that you, you, you got a mismatch, all
that effort.
NOTE CONF
You're done, but you haven't, you haven't found the occurrence
of the pattern.
NOTE CONF
You shift by 1.
So now pattern 1 to M is under 2 to
NOTE CONF
2 M + 1.
So you're kind of comparing M characters each time.
NOTE CONF
And while you're doing this, you're doing this scanning from
left to right until you find a mismatch, and that's
NOTE CONF
the naive algorithm that runs.
What's the complexity of an algorithm if you have the
NOTE CONF
pattern of length M and text of length N, what's
the complexity?
NOTE CONF
A big O of M times N.
Very good.
NOTE CONF
So, an algorithm would look like this.
You can write your naive algorithm, but if you want
NOTE CONF
to intuitively see an algorithm.
Look at a pathological case where the worst case MN
NOTE CONF
bound is hit.
If you have a text which is all of the
NOTE CONF
same character, pattern, all of the same character of a
different length.
NOTE CONF
You keep Comparing every character with every character, the whole
thing matched to report that the occurrence was at position
NOTE CONF
one in the text, shift by one, rinse, repeat, compare
every character of the region of the text that the
NOTE CONF
pattern is aligned under one character at a time.
If it matches you print that position and you keep
NOTE CONF
doing this and the bound of big of MN is
how it uh what you realise.
NOTE CONF
So this is not a linear time algorithm.
This would be sort of quadratic or it's basically product
NOTE CONF
of the text and.
The pattern lens.
NOTE CONF
Now the question is can we come up with an
algorithm that runs not in quadratic time but in linear
NOTE CONF
time in the sum of the lengths of the text
and pattern that's the sort of the trophy that we
NOTE CONF
want to sort of earn at the end of this
lecture.
NOTE CONF
So, if you keep continuing the naive thinking, not yet,
um, the smarter way of doing this, let's look at
NOTE CONF
a more Sort of, um, so the example that we
saw previously was a pathological case where everything was the
NOTE CONF
same letter.
Let's take something that has a bunch of letters and
NOTE CONF
what you have is a pattern A B X Y
A B X Z.
NOTE CONF
and what you're doing are iterations.
The iterations are shown as rows, so the patterns kind
NOTE CONF
of shifting one at a time.
Can you see the pattern is shifting one at a
NOTE CONF
time under the text.
And while you're doing it, you're comparing.
NOTE CONF
So in this case, X is compared with A, which
is a mismatch.
NOTE CONF
There's no point continuing.
Uh, the matching, so you can abort, shift by 1,
NOTE CONF
and you kind of compare again.
A matches with an A, B matches with a B,
NOTE CONF
X matches with an X, Y matches with a Y,
A matches with an A, B matches with a B,
NOTE CONF
X with X, but Y does not match with a
Z.
NOTE CONF
You've spent all this effort.
Matching until you got to the end, but it didn't
NOTE CONF
match, too bad, shift by one, rinse, repeat.
So that's basically the algorithm.
NOTE CONF
If for this specific examples, if you did the count,
you've done 20 comparisons.
NOTE CONF
Now, What I'm going to give you is the intuition
of how you would start thinking about saving.
NOTE CONF
Coming up with faster algorithms, what I'm not going to
give you immediately, in the next few slides, is an
NOTE CONF
algorithm itself, but the intuition, just what could you do
that is sensible and much of what we are going
NOTE CONF
to talk about is common sense.
So what we perceive as hard or easy is our
NOTE CONF
ability to sort of reason through that process, right?
So let's reason through that.
NOTE CONF
So what is the main idea?
The idea is we're shifting by one all the time
NOTE CONF
in the naive algorithms.
So first thing you want to do is, can you
NOTE CONF
shift more purposefully?
Can you shift a bit more aggressively than one than
NOTE CONF
than one position where it is possible.
It's not always true that you can always shift by
NOTE CONF
more than one character, but in some cases where you
can, if you have gained some certainty.
NOTE CONF
That you can shift more than 11 position under the
text, could you do that?
NOTE CONF
Are you, are you following me?
What the agenda is, everyone now.
NOTE CONF
But the whole idea of an algorithm is to guarantee
that at the end of this process you find all
NOTE CONF
occurrences of the pattern in text that is non-negotiable.
So every time you shift, you're not just being aggressive
NOTE CONF
or purposeful, you also have to be safe.
You have to say that I love to shift because
NOTE CONF
everything in between is going to be a mismatch.
OK?
NOTE CONF
So there are two goal objectives that we want to
achieve.
NOTE CONF
Where possible, shift by one greater than one position and
never shift past.
NOTE CONF
An occurrence in the text, meaning that you never miss
an occurrence in the text.
NOTE CONF
So those two guarantees is what you have to do.
Let's see if we can intuit at least two types
NOTE CONF
of speeds speed ups that we could do.
So here's an algorithm, same example as before that we
NOTE CONF
saw for the naive.
In the first iteration, X does not match with an
NOTE CONF
A.
Well, all you have done is matched one character X
NOTE CONF
with one character A and.
That iteration, you know that it doesn't match at position
NOTE CONF
one.
You shift by 1 as you would do in a
NOTE CONF
naive position, and the second, uh, iteration, A matched with
an A, B matched with a B, X matched with
NOTE CONF
an X, all the way X matched with an X,
and then the last character Z in the pattern did
NOTE CONF
not match with the opposing character in the text Y.
OK, so Y does not match with Z.
NOTE CONF
Now what do you do?
Now in doing the scan.
NOTE CONF
You have read the text in the region we have
known what A is.
NOTE CONF
A was a previous iteration, sorry, the, the one was
the previous iteration.
NOTE CONF
The current iteration starts at region 2 to region 8
you've matched.
NOTE CONF
9th was a mismatch, so 2 to 8 matches 1
to 7, but in doing so you've seen that.
NOTE CONF
The pattern starts with an A.
The region has another A at position 6 after position
NOTE CONF
2.
So position 2 was an A you matched and you
NOTE CONF
went ahead, but the next A was at position 6.
If you aligned the pattern which starts with an A
NOTE CONF
with any other character other than an A, it would
be a mismatch in the first position, isn't it?
NOTE CONF
So for instance, I'll just go back to this.
We, if you aligned it with B, it was a
NOTE CONF
mismatch.
If you aligned with an X, it was a mismatch.
NOTE CONF
If you aligned with a Y, it was a mismatch,
but it was started to have a match at position
NOTE CONF
6 because the first letter A in the pattern is
same as, as the A first appears after the um
NOTE CONF
at position 2 at position.
6.
NOTE CONF
So the idea would be that I can skip the
comparisons of 345 and directly jump and do my third
NOTE CONF
iteration starting from position 6 rather than position 34, or
5.
NOTE CONF
If I were doing a naive one, I have to
shift by 1 and compare it would be a mismatch.
NOTE CONF
Shift by 1, compare it to be a mismatch, shift
by 1, compare, it's going to be a mismatch, then
NOTE CONF
it at least has to start with an A.
So that's kind of one easy trick to reduce the
NOTE CONF
comparisons and in fact in this example you've saved 3
extra comparisons.
NOTE CONF
Now can you do more?
Well, take a look at.
NOTE CONF
When you had, uh, quiet please, when you had, um,
when you had a mismatch at.
NOTE CONF
Position 9 in the text with the last letter in
the pattern, so Y did not match with with Z.
NOTE CONF
Look at the string before that.
There's a substring which is A, B, X.
NOTE CONF
Which is the same as ABX in the text, which
is also the same as the prefix of the pattern.
NOTE CONF
So somehow, It is not just the first letter that
that match.
NOTE CONF
You also want, if you want to generalise this thinking,
the second letter could match or third letter could match.
NOTE CONF
Could you possibly preprocess the pattern?
Is there enough information in the pattern, even before you
NOTE CONF
saw the text?
Could you be able to pre-process it so that when
NOTE CONF
you shift this, when you do, when you think about
this iteration where you found the second iteration ended in
NOTE CONF
a mismatch, when you shift by 3.
You are essentially ensuring that ABX, which is this set
NOTE CONF
of letters, I will draw the box here.
ABX is same as ABX is same as um.
NOTE CONF
A B X.
So because those three relationships are the same.
NOTE CONF
Can I Shift so that The comparisons of those characters
A B X becomes.
NOTE CONF
Irrelevant, unnecessary, because we know that we have shifted because
that suffix up until position 6.
NOTE CONF
So when I say suffix, I'll just give you a
clarity here.
NOTE CONF
For the, for the part of the pattern.
Which, before the mismatch, before the mismatch, there is some
NOTE CONF
suffix of the part that you've matched that matches the
prefix.
NOTE CONF
OK, and the idea would be if that's the case,
then you will always end up with a scenario where
NOTE CONF
these things are the best bet for you to line
up.
NOTE CONF
Any other lining up will create a mismatch.
OK, if such a suffix before the mismatch doesn't exist,
NOTE CONF
then you can shift it past the mismatch without even,
you can be very more aggressive.
NOTE CONF
The suffixes.
The whole length minus 1, then you shift by 1.
NOTE CONF
So really the length of the suffix, how big the
suffix that you found, tells you how aggressively you can
NOTE CONF
shift.
Now I have not really made anything crystal clear, so
NOTE CONF
that's the kind of improvements that you're thinking about now.
We'll not worry about that specific way of improvements in
NOTE CONF
this lecture.
Boyo Moore especially uses this kind of thinking, but let's
NOTE CONF
actually.
Focus on.
NOTE CONF
An algorithm called Z algorithm, this lecture, with that intuition
of what the problem is and the kind of improvements
NOTE CONF
that you want to be doing, we'll focus on Z
algorithm, which is not really about exact pattern matching.
NOTE CONF
It's basically an algorithm that preprocesses a string.
The input is one string, not two strings.
NOTE CONF
Pattern matching involves two strings, a text and a pattern.
But for now, until the end of the lecture, this
NOTE CONF
lecture, think about just one string.
A string is given to you, and you want to
NOTE CONF
pre-process some information out of it, and we'll see what
specific pre-processing we have to do.
NOTE CONF
Now, why am I teaching this Z algorithm?
Because it's a fairly versatile algorithm, but it actually makes
NOTE CONF
Z algorithm.
Which was developed by Boyer and Moore, uh sorry, uh,
NOTE CONF
the the Boyer Moore Moore algorithm is used in all
kinds of search system.
NOTE CONF
It was developed in 1970s.
Z algorithm was invented in 19 mid 1990s.
NOTE CONF
It actually makes BO more shifting, far more intuitive and
easy to implement.
NOTE CONF
So knowing that algorithm helps you for the next week,
but there are many other things that you could do
NOTE CONF
with that algorithm to, to kind of uh push your
pre-processing.
NOTE CONF
So let's actually.
Not waste the time and learn about what Z algorithm
NOTE CONF
is.
I'll go to the board from time to time while
NOTE CONF
doing this.
Now, question is, what is the goal of a Z
NOTE CONF
algorithm?
I'll go to the board now.
NOTE CONF
Let's see.
So, if you're given a string.
NOTE CONF
Now, in the lecture, I'm going to use one-based indexing.
Your computers are best done in zero-based indexing.
NOTE CONF
You understand what one-based indexing and zero-based indexing is.
In arrays, you, you, you say array of 0123, that's
NOTE CONF
zero-based.
Human beings say it's the first element, second element, third
NOTE CONF
element.
So 123 is human, human intuitive indexing.
NOTE CONF
And there's a reason why I do this.
It's because it'll force you not to copy what I
NOTE CONF
do, but actually think about what you're doing when you
go to a computer.
NOTE CONF
And I'm, I kind of say this in every semester
that I do, I teach that.
NOTE CONF
The best person thing to convince that you understand an
algorithm.
NOTE CONF
Is a computer, not the code that's not the code
slop from Gen AI, but when you talk to a
NOTE CONF
computer, computer would would force you to understand an algorithm
fully clearly, crystal clearly.
NOTE CONF
It forces you to crystallise an algorithm in your head.
If you haven't crystallised an algorithm in your head, you
NOTE CONF
will be writing something ambiguous, amorphous.
It will garbage in, garbage out.
NOTE CONF
So in that sense, A computer is the best bullshit
detector, yeah, better than human beings.
NOTE CONF
So it'll detect.
And I'm saying this because the amount of bullshit have
NOTE CONF
thrown into it for a long life that I've lived,
um, was enormous, but it's by doing that, by acting,
NOTE CONF
getting those bugs.
Uh, that's when you realise that you're not thinking clearly,
NOTE CONF
it forces you to crystallise.
Learning happens when you're implementing.
NOTE CONF
But anyway, so if you have a string, so what
does, does this algorithm do?
NOTE CONF
I'll get my own Stuff.
So the algorithm Z algorithm.
NOTE CONF
So input is a string, 1 to N or 0
N minus 1, depending on whether it's a human being
NOTE CONF
you're talking to a computer.
The output would be A Z array, one for each
NOTE CONF
position.
So position.
NOTE CONF
Let's call it position I or position K.
There are loop variables.
NOTE CONF
ZK or Zi value.
would be an integer.
NOTE CONF
So there's an integer that you would.
Report as an output.
NOTE CONF
Now we'll see what that integer is.
So for every single position I, you're reporting an integer,
NOTE CONF
OK.
So there's an int that you, you report in each
NOTE CONF
of these.
So it's a, it's an array of integers.
NOTE CONF
So, So what is Z of I telling you or
ZK in general?
NOTE CONF
I mean, I, I use when I'm speaking about no
other variables, I use I, but when you have some
NOTE CONF
other variables involved and there's some state variables in, in
the algorithm.
NOTE CONF
Uh, you know, on a computer, I and L look
very same.
NOTE CONF
If I'm using a state variable L, I tend to
use the loop variable as K.
NOTE CONF
So as long as it's a variable, you can just
say that it's a loop variable.
NOTE CONF
So this is some loop variable that's moving from the
first element to the nth element corresponding to each, each,
NOTE CONF
um, um, character in the string.
There will be some number that you're storing and what
NOTE CONF
is this number?
It is the length.
NOTE CONF
So it is the length.
Of the longest substring, starting at position I, so substring,
NOTE CONF
you understand what a substring is.
Substring is essentially a part of the string, a contiguous
NOTE CONF
part of the string that starts at position and ends
at a position.
NOTE CONF
So let's say you have a substring of length L.
That means that the end would be I + L
NOTE CONF
minus 1.
If it's starting at I, and the length is L,
NOTE CONF
it has to be I + L minus 1, isn't
it, the end point.
NOTE CONF
What is the length of the longest substring starting at
I?
NOTE CONF
That matches the prefix of that same length.
OK, I will go to the, while that is there,
NOTE CONF
I'll just go to the next slide so that you're
now not afraid of the definition.
NOTE CONF
Definition is fairly easy.
It's the length you're storing some length of the longest.
NOTE CONF
Substring Starting Act I Matching Prefix, matching the prefix.
Is that statement clear?
NOTE CONF
It is the length.
Of the longest substring that starts at I that matches
NOTE CONF
the prefix now.
The word longest is important because it's telling you something
NOTE CONF
very crucial.
So if you have some length L substring, which is
NOTE CONF
the longest that matches the prefix of that same length,
so if this is starting at 1, this has to
NOTE CONF
start at, where does it end?
If it starts at 1, where does the prefix end?
NOTE CONF
This is of length L, and we're saying that this
matches this.
NOTE CONF
Is it L minus 1 in one-based indexing?
In one-based indexing It's gonna be L, isn't it?
NOTE CONF
L in zero base indexing would be 0 to L
minus 1 or 1 to L.
NOTE CONF
That's what we're saying.
That's the difference between indexing.
NOTE CONF
So now it's the longest.
This part is very important because if you have some
NOTE CONF
character X following this region, OK.
I to I + L minus 1 is some substring,
NOTE CONF
and it has a letter X, then this character is
any other character but X.
NOTE CONF
Right, So this character after L, so this is where
we position L + 1.
NOTE CONF
And this is going to be position I plus L.
So I + L in one base indexing will be
NOTE CONF
different from the character after the match on the prefix
side.
NOTE CONF
Does that make sense, everyone?
This definition is important.
NOTE CONF
If you don't understand the definition, here's the time for
you to raise your hand and tell me what you
NOTE CONF
didn't understand.
And don't worry, I'm quite happy to explain.
NOTE CONF
Is everyone clear, if they're not clear.
We will, if you're not clear, just listen on to
NOTE CONF
that example, look at that string.
The string is A A B C A A B
NOTE CONF
X A A Y, right?
Now Z1.
NOTE CONF
So first, we're doing one-based indexing.
So first one, What would be the longest substring starting
NOTE CONF
for any string, what would be the longest substring starting
at the first position?
NOTE CONF
That matches itself.
Itself, right, the, the length of the string.
NOTE CONF
So really Z1, the first position is really not important
for us, because it's a trivial string.
NOTE CONF
This will always be the size of the string, yeah,
N.
NOTE CONF
OK.
Z1 will always be or Z0 if you're writing it
NOTE CONF
in on a computer, the first.
Element in the Z array is always going to be
NOTE CONF
the length of the whole string because why?
Strings are like ordered elements of a set.
NOTE CONF
So a set is a subset of itself.
So a string is a prefix of itself, right?
NOTE CONF
So it's just, it's a special mathematical object which has
order in it, order of characters, right?
NOTE CONF
But let's look at in that example, 2, OK?
So let's actually, I'm going to take this out for
NOTE CONF
a bit.
So, let's take the 2nd.
NOTE CONF
Uh, the example and do Z2.
So it's A A B C A.
NOTE CONF
A B X A A Y.
OK.
NOTE CONF
123456789, 1011, I think.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So Z1 we said was trivial.
It's always going to be the length of the string,
NOTE CONF
whatever the string is.
In this case, it will be 11, isn't it?
NOTE CONF
Z1.
Everyone with me?
NOTE CONF
What about Z?
So if I want, when the variable I equals 2
NOTE CONF
or loop variable is 2, the loop variable is 2.
What is Z of 2?
NOTE CONF
So it is 1 because what is the longest substring
starting at 2 that matches the prefix if you were
NOTE CONF
doing this algorithm naively, this matches with this, so it
is 1.
NOTE CONF
These don't match 1 the character after that doesn't match,
that means that the length is 1, isn't it?
NOTE CONF
So Z1 is 1.
So what about the next one?
NOTE CONF
So you say, how do you go about doing it?
Z 3?
NOTE CONF
Well, this, does it match with this?
The answer is no.
NOTE CONF
B does not match with an A because the relationship
of the longest substring starting at any positions matching the
NOTE CONF
prefix, so the answer is 0.
So Z3 is 0.
NOTE CONF
What about Z4?
OK, now what about Z5?
NOTE CONF
3 OK, A matches with an A.
A, the next A matches with an A, the next
NOTE CONF
B matches with a B, but those don't match, isn't
it?
NOTE CONF
So, essentially, A, A, B, well, I should have drawn
a box there because Z2 was 1, Z 5 was
NOTE CONF
3.
So remember, that relationship A B AAB is same as
NOTE CONF
As a prefix, right?
These two things are the same.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
The next character after that is different.
NOTE CONF
So, are you happy with the remaining boxes that I've
written?
NOTE CONF
Just stare at it.
Just stare at it for a few seconds.
NOTE CONF
If there's anything not clear, raise your hand.
Is everything clear?
NOTE CONF
Yes sir.
Very good.
NOTE CONF
So my next question was, how would you, what would
be the complexity of this algorithm?
NOTE CONF
So I'm just, I just told you what Z values
are.
NOTE CONF
I didn't tell you how to compute it yet.
The algorithm is to actually do it.
NOTE CONF
efficiently.
If you're doing it naively, what would be the complexity?
NOTE CONF
There's no M here, there's only one letter, one string,
N squared, because in the worst case, you have, if
NOTE CONF
you have all A's, you can see yourself that you'll
be comparing it repeatedly all the way to the end
NOTE CONF
from every position.
So, 2 to N with 1 N minus 13 to
NOTE CONF
N to 12 N minus 2, and so on, right?
So if they're all A's, you keep, keep on doing
NOTE CONF
the algorithm.
If you write itself naively is N squared.
NOTE CONF
Now the question is, can you do this algorithm, compute
the Z values in order and time, linear time, and
NOTE CONF
that's precisely what the Z algorithm of Gus fields preprocessing
does.
NOTE CONF
I'll then tell you.
With this preprocessing, you can solve the pattern matching problem
NOTE CONF
in linear time.
OK?
NOTE CONF
We'll do that at the very end.
So that will be the mic drop moment for us,
NOTE CONF
yeah.
So, Now, I have defined these boxes intuitively, right?
NOTE CONF
So I've boxes mean, well, that's the length of the
substring that matches the prefix.
NOTE CONF
Each box is telling you that there exists a prefix
for that box, corresponding box where it matches, right?
NOTE CONF
So it's always a relationship of the box with its
prefix.
NOTE CONF
So A matches with an A here.
Here A A B matches with an A A B
NOTE CONF
prefix again.
Here they're the box inside.
NOTE CONF
A matches with an A.
It's a prefix.
NOTE CONF
Here AA matches with the AA.
So always the boxes are matching the prefix.
NOTE CONF
Now if I have to define a box in a
computer programme, it has to be an interval, isn't it?
NOTE CONF
It's an interval that has a start point and an
end point.
NOTE CONF
So when I talk about a Z box, I really,
I'm talking about a start point and an endpoint.
NOTE CONF
Is that clear?
So it's a substring that starts at some position and
NOTE CONF
in that position you really don't need to store a
Z box except for you just need to understand that
NOTE CONF
whenever we talk about some state variables it's talking about
a Z box that starts at some position and ends
NOTE CONF
at some position that's all you need to keep in
mind so.
NOTE CONF
So, I, some of the boxes are undefined because Z3
was 0.
NOTE CONF
Usually, in an interval rotation, when you store, if the
endpoint is 1 less than the start point, it is
NOTE CONF
an interval of length 0 in mathematics, right?
Start point, end point, if they're same, it's of length
NOTE CONF
12 to 2 is length 1.
So undefined can be thought of as end point being
NOTE CONF
less than the start point or one less than the
start point, to be, to be precise, so you don't
NOTE CONF
have to worry about it.
undefined is undefined.
NOTE CONF
You only have to worry about those where the length
of these boxes are at least 1123, and so on,
NOTE CONF
greater than 0.
All right, so in all this, so I'm going to
NOTE CONF
talk about two state variables that you have to maintain.
When I bring up the slide, you'll see a lot
NOTE CONF
of text.
Don't worry.
NOTE CONF
Oh, you'll see something, um, confusing, but it's very, very
simple to intuit, OK?
NOTE CONF
So, the state variables that you have to worry about.
I've got to first write it before I, before you
NOTE CONF
see them.
So every iteration, can I use, uh, I'm just changing
NOTE CONF
the loop variable from I to K from now on,
from this slide onwards.
NOTE CONF
There's a, I mean, at least on the slide you
will see a, see an I, but I will move
NOTE CONF
to a K notation, doesn't matter, it's a loop.
So let's say that you are at some position K.
NOTE CONF
If you don't like K, call it I, it doesn't
matter.
NOTE CONF
I, I can write it, write it as I.
KR I, whatever you want.
NOTE CONF
So What would be.
At each position k.
NOTE CONF
You have to define a state variable called L and
R, left and right.
NOTE CONF
We'll just, for every iteration, you only need two numbers,
left and right, and I'm going to give you an
NOTE CONF
intuition of what the state variables are when you do
the algorithm.
NOTE CONF
So, so what would be the.
Rightmost endpoint of all Z boxes you have seen at
NOTE CONF
or before K.
So how many Z boxes have you seen at or
NOTE CONF
before K equals 4 here?
What is the rightmost end point of that red box?
NOTE CONF
Where does it end?
2.
NOTE CONF
OK, so let's move, use another k.
What about?
NOTE CONF
K equals 6.
What is the rightmost endpoint of all Z boxes at
NOTE CONF
or before position 6?
Z boxes that start at or before position 6.
NOTE CONF
7.
So now I'm gonna bring up the slide and then
NOTE CONF
take a look at the definition there.
So for each position, for each, uh, position in the
NOTE CONF
string, you have a list of.
The rightmost uh end point of all Z boxes at
NOTE CONF
or before that position.
OK, let's take a look at position 2.
NOTE CONF
Let's now do position 1 is not interesting.
Position 1 is dummy, so we don't care.
NOTE CONF
The first position is, is you ignore what's the rightmost
endpoint of all Z boxes at or before position 2?
NOTE CONF
It has to be 2, isn't it?
There's only one bit Z box that starts at 2
NOTE CONF
and ends at 2.
What about 3?
NOTE CONF
What's the rightmost endpoint?
It's 2.
NOTE CONF
Rightmost endpoint of all Z boxes at or before, OK,
so the answer is still 2.
NOTE CONF
So Z 3 is 2.
What about 4?
NOTE CONF
It is still 2.
What about 5?
NOTE CONF
So 5 has a Z box that starts at 5,
ends at 7.
NOTE CONF
So now at 5, the rightmost endpoint you've seen is
7.
NOTE CONF
For 6, there's a Z box starting at 6, there's
a Z box starting at 5, there's a Z box
NOTE CONF
starting at 2.
Um So If you have If you're, so by the
NOTE CONF
way, if you're losing interest or something, get engaged in
the lecture, ask me questions, and you'll, you'll snap back
NOTE CONF
in, yeah, please, it's a very important discussion.
It's fun.
NOTE CONF
It's a simple algorithm once you process it.
OK, so we're looking at K equals 6 or the
NOTE CONF
index equals 6.
There are 3 Z boxes, one starting at 61 starting
NOTE CONF
at 51 starting at 2.
What's the rightmost end points of those red uh of
NOTE CONF
those Z boxes?
It is 7, isn't it?
NOTE CONF
And if you did the same thing, you will essentially
get.
NOTE CONF
Uh, uh, the state of the rightmost in every iteration.
Every iteration you're doing, there'll be a rightmost endpoints of
NOTE CONF
the red boxes that you've seen at or before, yeah?
Now Is everyone clear about what this R variable is?
NOTE CONF
It's a state variable which we will, which will help
us save the computation comparison, OK?
NOTE CONF
I'll just have one more definition and then we'll get
into the algorithm straight.
NOTE CONF
So I've defined you what a Z.
Values are Zi values are.
NOTE CONF
I told you that Z boxes are intervals where it
start and end.
NOTE CONF
I told you what the state variable are, R for
right, rightmost end point of all Z boxes interval.
NOTE CONF
All I have to do is one more definition which
is the left.
NOTE CONF
What is the left value?
It is slightly different to what I just said about
NOTE CONF
how I define R.
Well, left is quite simply that whenever you define an
NOTE CONF
R, there is a start point for that Z box,
the left.
NOTE CONF
The start point to the left of that Z box,
the interval where the, so we have defined the right
NOTE CONF
of the interval.
The left would be where it started.
NOTE CONF
It, it's not the leftmost, it's where it started.
So, so if the, I'll just bring the next slide
NOTE CONF
up because all of them.
So right here is 2.
NOTE CONF
So right here is 2 for the Z box.
Where does the Z box start?
NOTE CONF
It starts at 2, right?
The left would also be 2.
NOTE CONF
3 has the right at 2.
Where, where does the Z box ending at 2 start?
NOTE CONF
Well, it starts at 2.
4 for, uh, what is the rightmost endpoint for for
NOTE CONF
index 4?
What's the rightmost endpoint of all the boxes at all
NOTE CONF
before?
It is 2.
NOTE CONF
Where does it start?
It's a 2.
NOTE CONF
Now, at 5, it ends at 7, where does that
start?
NOTE CONF
It starts at 5.
At 6, it starts at 5.
NOTE CONF
At 7, it starts at 5.
At 8, it starts at 5 because the Z box
NOTE CONF
ends at ends at 7, right?
The rightmost end ends at 7.
NOTE CONF
Now, 9.
The rightmost endpoint is basically um the rightmost endpoint ends
NOTE CONF
at 10.
Where does it start?
NOTE CONF
It starts at 9.
10 is a bit tricky.
NOTE CONF
Focus on 10.
It says what is the.
NOTE CONF
Left of the Z box that ends at some R
value.
NOTE CONF
So what the, what is the R value of R
of 10?
NOTE CONF
Out of 10 is, is position 10, isn't it?
The index is position 10.
NOTE CONF
Is that correct?
Where, where does that Z box start?
NOTE CONF
Well, there are two Z boxes that are starting, right?
There's one starting at position 9 ending at 10, 1
NOTE CONF
starting at position 10 ending at 10.
Now in the Z algorithm, it doesn't matter where, which
NOTE CONF
one you choose.
It can be anyone if there are multiple Z boxes
NOTE CONF
all ending at the same point, if the rightmost as.
More than one options you choose any one of them
NOTE CONF
as it's as it's left uh as a as a
left associated with it so in this case left I've
NOTE CONF
chosen to be the longer one so.
It still, I could have defined L10 as 10, it
NOTE CONF
would have still worked.
OK?
NOTE CONF
Yes, sir.
Position 6 Um, that's because what is the rightmost, very
NOTE CONF
good question, what is the rightmost endpoint?
First, to define L, you have to reason what right
NOTE CONF
is.
What is the rightmost endpoint of all Z boxes starting
NOTE CONF
at that position or before it?
So there are 3 Z boxes that start, so that
NOTE CONF
are that are at or before it Z 6 that
ends at 6, Z the the Z box at 5
NOTE CONF
that ends at 7, Z box at 2 that ends
at 2.
NOTE CONF
What is the rightmost end point?
It is 7, isn't it?
NOTE CONF
Now L is the start point of that Z box.
So that's the reason why it's not.
NOTE CONF
It's a very good question.
That's one of the common.
NOTE CONF
Uh, sort of misconceptions that one would have, you're going
through the slides serially.
NOTE CONF
Is everyone clear with the definitions?
Yes sir.
NOTE CONF
L10 can be 10, but there are L10 has the
rightmost Z box ending at position 10, isn't it?
NOTE CONF
There are two Z boxes that start, one at position
9 and one of position 10 that ends at that
NOTE CONF
both end at 10.
You can choose any one of them.
NOTE CONF
That's the point.
You can even you have multiple Z boxes all ending
NOTE CONF
at the same R value, you can choose any one
of them.
NOTE CONF
It's always a convention to use a larger one anyway
so for any pair of um.
NOTE CONF
R I N L I they're referring to a box
and that is very far to the right, as far
NOTE CONF
to the right as possible um.
I think the intuition is correct.
NOTE CONF
So the suggestion was, can you, can you interpret the
state variables R and L for any iteration to be
NOTE CONF
a Z box that Is the right most for any
computation.
NOTE CONF
That's what you were suggesting that intuition is by and
large correct, by and large correct in a sense it's
NOTE CONF
surely correct for R and R implies that the start
point L would be.
NOTE CONF
Essentially, it's a Z box that it is R and
L will define a Z box for sure.
NOTE CONF
And R is the rightmost occurrences of all Z box
that you've seen previously.
NOTE CONF
So by that definition, it has to be correct, OK.
OK, now I've just, all I've done is define these
NOTE CONF
things, then I have to tell you that we can
now start thinking about an algorithm that runs in ON
NOTE CONF
time, which otherwise would run ON 2 if you did
something naively.
NOTE CONF
Now, naive computation we've already covered now.
Although I'm, uh, my, my goal here is to compute,
NOTE CONF
let me just say this.
If you have any questions, ask me, please.
NOTE CONF
Um, my goal is to compute the array of ZI
values.
NOTE CONF
I really don't need this because if at any point
if I have a start point, and the, so if
NOTE CONF
I have some index K where, and it's Z value
is ZK, do I know where this ends?
NOTE CONF
If it starts at position K, where does it end?
And the length is equal to Z of K, end
NOTE CONF
point is what?
K plus the length minus 1, isn't it?
NOTE CONF
So start point plus length minus 1 is give you
the endpoint.
NOTE CONF
So really, you don't need to store the interval so
long as you have the position K and the value
NOTE CONF
of of the length that you're storing in the in
the uh in this algorithm.
NOTE CONF
Now, so, and one last thing I want to say
is you don't need to store LNR values.
NOTE CONF
Of everything that you've seen previously, you only have to
keep in, in your memory, the latest values of LNR,
NOTE CONF
meaning that when you're iterating, computing the ZI values, so
if you're at some position, I or K in the
NOTE CONF
loop.
You would have an LNR value that gets updated after
NOTE CONF
you compute, after you find the ZK value.
It kind of keeps updating.
NOTE CONF
You only need one copy, a temporary variable LNR, which
always is treated to be the the rightmost end point
NOTE CONF
and it's corresponding start point that you have seen thus
far, OK, in an iteration now.
NOTE CONF
11 thing I wanted to also tell you, stare at
the rightmost end points.
NOTE CONF
Have you convinced yourself that So you see these numbers
are always same or greater.
NOTE CONF
Can they ever be, can they ever decrease?
Can someone tell me why?
NOTE CONF
Anyone?
Ah sorry, I didn't.
NOTE CONF
The question was that if you look at the uh
our values.
NOTE CONF
OK, so our values, so 2227777, 1010 10, they seem
to be same monotonically increasing.
NOTE CONF
OK, that's the word in mathematics, right?
Same or more, they're monotonic.
NOTE CONF
Now, can they decrease?
Why?
NOTE CONF
Once For example So it's the rightmost of everything that
you've seen before.
NOTE CONF
So once you have defined a frontier, you can't recede
the frontier, you only have to either update it or
NOTE CONF
use it stays the same.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So that's what you've Um, you're doing, so remember the
right always keeps monotonically increasing this algorithm because that is
NOTE CONF
key to thinking about the complexity, yeah, at the late,
later on, OK, so let's basically forget about this, forget
NOTE CONF
about the slide.
I just directly jump into that slide is basically giving
NOTE CONF
you everything I said in words.
It's prep prepping you about the algorithm which I already
NOTE CONF
said all you need is a state variable LNR and
you're going from.
NOTE CONF
The second you don't care about the 1st Z Zi
value.
NOTE CONF
So the 1st value of uh in the Z array
is the length.
NOTE CONF
You don't even have to worry about computing it.
You have to start from the 2nd, 3rd, 4th.
NOTE CONF
You're iterating.
So let's start with the 2nd.
NOTE CONF
Z2 value in the one-base indexing.
When you start the algorithm for any string, you have
NOTE CONF
no choice but to do the naive comparison.
2 is compared with the first letter in the prefix.
NOTE CONF
3 is compared with the 2nd.
4 is compared with the 3rd.
NOTE CONF
And you keep doing this until you see a mismatch,
and that will tell you the length.
NOTE CONF
So is Z2 computation, is everyone clear about what it
is?
NOTE CONF
By the way, this is a stage, if you don't
understand anything, please, please, please raise your hand.
NOTE CONF
It's a otherwise you'll start missing everything that follows.
Is everyone clear what we're discussing here?
NOTE CONF
OK.
I'm just making sure.
NOTE CONF
Yes, sir?
It was OK, so.
NOTE CONF
LNR, the state variables LNR for every iteration.
So what you're the, the definition of R is, is
NOTE CONF
defined first.
It is the rightmost endpoint of everything that you've seen
NOTE CONF
at or before.
So if you are at an iteration, but you've not
NOTE CONF
yet computed, you only have the before, right?
So if you're, if you're computing ZK value at some,
NOTE CONF
some position in the, in the string, you only the
assumption is that you have computed the ZK values before
NOTE CONF
that position.
So what is the rightmost endpoint that you have seen
NOTE CONF
so far?
L is basically where that Z box, you know where
NOTE CONF
it ended, right most, where did it start?
So R and L is basically a Z box, which
NOTE CONF
is the rightmost that you have seen for, for the
uh iteration that you're doing, you're starting your thinking from
NOTE CONF
position of K equals 2.
OK.
NOTE CONF
Let's say K equals 2, or here we're using the
loop variable K here, not I.
NOTE CONF
So K equals 2, you're comparing explicitly 2 with the
1st, 3 with the second, character at 4 with the
NOTE CONF
third, and so on, right?
So yeah, that's what the comparison is.
NOTE CONF
You're finding the longest substring starting at 2 that matches
the prefix.
NOTE CONF
Is everyone clear?
It'll give you a length.
NOTE CONF
The length can be 0.
When is the length 0?
NOTE CONF
When the character at position 2 is different from the
the character at the start of the string.
NOTE CONF
So they are different, right?
It doesn't.
NOTE CONF
Can you please keep your voices up, if you don't
mind, if I, I'm quite happy to help, if you,
NOTE CONF
do you want me to help with something.
OK, so, yes.
NOTE CONF
Uh, say that again, I'm sorry.
OK, mismatch would be when you are.
NOTE CONF
I'll go to the board.
Let's compute Z5 naively, OK?
NOTE CONF
So you're saying the fifth, the character at position 5
is compared with 1, you agree?
NOTE CONF
Because you're, you're saying what's the longest substring that matches
the prefix?
NOTE CONF
A matches with an A, do you agree?
The next A also matches.
NOTE CONF
The next B also matches.
The next character is a mismatch.
NOTE CONF
So mismatch is when you can no longer extend the
substring because the characters that you're matching is are, are
NOTE CONF
different.
So here C is not the same as X.
NOTE CONF
So in this case, We are talking about Z2.
You're comparing the second character with the first character, right?
NOTE CONF
The longest substring starting at 2 matches the prefix.
Well, does that match?
NOTE CONF
does a match with an A?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
What about the next characters?
They don't.
NOTE CONF
So the mismatch is after a length one substring.
So here in this case, Z2 would be of length
NOTE CONF
1.
So Z2 would be 1.
NOTE CONF
That's what you're, you're, you're storing there.
So if you go back to This, um, Slide here,
NOTE CONF
you're doing explicit left to right comparisons.
If the comparison results in a length, a substring of
NOTE CONF
length greater than 0.
What does that mean?
NOTE CONF
It means that you have a new rightmost endpoint.
Your R has to be updated.
NOTE CONF
Correct?
So previously when you started the algorithm, what was R?
NOTE CONF
Now, in a one-based indexing, LNR can be thought of
as 0.
NOTE CONF
L equals 0, if you can set up as L
equals 0 and R equals 0, right?
NOTE CONF
OK.
If it's a zero-base indexing, figure out what would be
NOTE CONF
the start points of LNR because 0 has a meaning
in a zero-based indexing.
NOTE CONF
0 has no meaning in the 1-base indexing, right?
But it doesn't matter.
NOTE CONF
Here is the ES case is where you're setting it,
so that's the reason you're handling it as a base
NOTE CONF
case where if it is greater than 0, R becomes
that value.
NOTE CONF
So it's start position plus length minus 1.
Start plus length minus 1 gives you the end point.
NOTE CONF
That's the rightmost occurrence, right?
So end point.
NOTE CONF
End point equals start point plus length minus 1.
Start point is 2, length is whatever you computed as
NOTE CONF
Z of 2 minus 1, that is going to be
the length plus 1 because for that position, index equals
NOTE CONF
2.
Does that make sense, everyone?
NOTE CONF
Yes sir, just a question from the previous slide which
you've already answered, but, um, with regards to just go
NOTE CONF
to the previous slide, OK.
I thought the previous slide I skipped over.
NOTE CONF
You meant this one?
OK, so for index 6, why did you pick?
NOTE CONF
OK, I think that seems to be stamping so It
is the rightmost end point at or before that you
NOTE CONF
have seen something.
So assuming that I'm defining, so it's the way you
NOTE CONF
define it, um, so when you're starting an algorithm, you're
not yet computed the Z box at that position.
NOTE CONF
That means that the definition would be all you've seen
before, but I'm making a definition at or before.
NOTE CONF
As a definition of RI, it's just a matter of
definition.
NOTE CONF
If you want to, if you're comfortable calling it before
the current position, exclusive of the current position, that also
NOTE CONF
leads you to the same algorithm.
It doesn't really matter.
NOTE CONF
For the definition I have given, which is at or
before, at or before at position 6, the rightmost endpoint
NOTE CONF
at or before.
There's a Z box starting at position 6 that ends
NOTE CONF
at 6, but before there's a, there's a Z box
starting at 5 that ends at 7.
NOTE CONF
So the rightmost endpoint is 7.
At position 6, the frontier of a Z box that
NOTE CONF
I've seen ends at position 7.
The, the rightmost endpoint of all Z boxes I've seen.
NOTE CONF
So where does that start?
It starts at position 5.
NOTE CONF
So your LNR values will be 5.7 after you finish
iteration 6.
NOTE CONF
All right, so We have computed the Z2 value explicitly.
This is nothing but think about this if you're confused
NOTE CONF
about this slide.
Think about this is you're doing what you would do.
NOTE CONF
Naively, so when you have to compute the longest substring
starting at 2 that matches the prefix, you would go
NOTE CONF
one letter at a time, 2 with the 1st, 3
with the second, so on until you find a mismatch
NOTE CONF
that gives you the length, and then you're saying my
right value has to be I found a value that
NOTE CONF
is the rightmost endpoint that is beyond what I have
previously found, so I have to update the right as.
NOTE CONF
End point equals start point, so right is nothing but
the end point.
NOTE CONF
Start point plus L minus 1, start point is 2,
length is Z2 minus 1 is minus 1.
NOTE CONF
So if I just did the arithmetic here, it's going
to be Z2 + 1.
NOTE CONF
What length that you get plus 1 would be your
R value.
NOTE CONF
What is, where did that Z box start?
Obviously because it's a Z box that you've computed, it's
NOTE CONF
starting at position 2, so the left would be at
position 2.
NOTE CONF
Does that make sense?
Now if the length was.
NOTE CONF
Not greater than 0 if you did not mean the,
the very first character was a mismatch.
NOTE CONF
Obviously, you have nothing, so you have to set it
to 0.
NOTE CONF
I mean so it's when you're, so when you start
the algorithm, if you don't want the ELS case, you
NOTE CONF
have the algorithm starting with R equals 0 and L
equals 0.
NOTE CONF
L L R equals 0.0, yeah.
But if you want to explicitly use this as an
NOTE CONF
initialization step, that's what a base case is, you have
to set that as an ES case.
NOTE CONF
So else, if it's not greater than 0, you're setting
the values to 0, RNL values to 0 and 0.
NOTE CONF
Be very careful when you're writing this into your com
on a computer.
NOTE CONF
It won't using zero values won't help you.
Uh, help on a computer, right?
NOTE CONF
You have to change that into um into values that
are sensible.
NOTE CONF
I'll let you think about what sensible values are, what
would be the initialization that you'll have to use.
NOTE CONF
Now that's the base case.
Now So that in this example, you found a Z
NOTE CONF
box of length 1, so that's why you see a
box.
NOTE CONF
So what, you finished this iteration, your state variables are
now pointing to L equals 2, R equals 2.
NOTE CONF
Does that make sense?
The Z box starting at 2 and ending at 2
NOTE CONF
so far.
Now, what's the next iteration after K equals 2?
NOTE CONF
K equals 3, isn't it?
Now, I'll go to the board.
NOTE CONF
So I want you to now think a bit more
abstractly.
NOTE CONF
You have this loop variable K.
What is this K?
NOTE CONF
You want to find out what is the ZK value.
That's what you want to find out.
NOTE CONF
You don't know yet Which is the longest substring starting
at K that matches the prefix.
NOTE CONF
So how long can you go, um, from K onwards,
that is same as the subs the prefix of that
NOTE CONF
string.
Now, what are the scenarios?
NOTE CONF
I can have Your state variable R and L.
Where K is greater than R, that's case 1.
NOTE CONF
OK.
So, R Can be So K is greater than R,
NOTE CONF
right?
So that's one case.
NOTE CONF
Case 2.
Is I have a K.
NOTE CONF
I have K, sandwiched between an L and an R.
Because there's some Z box previously that I've computed, whose
NOTE CONF
endpoint is shot past, and I have to compute ZK
value where the rightmost endpoint is actually later on here.
NOTE CONF
So, Case is case 3 possible?
Case 3, maybe I'll write, I'll draw.
NOTE CONF
Case 3, I'll write, draw here.
So that's K.
NOTE CONF
Is this possible?
Why I haven't discovered an L because LNR defines a
NOTE CONF
Z box at all previously.
I have not seen any Z box in the future,
NOTE CONF
so really there are two cases.
The case one is when K is greater than R.
NOTE CONF
Case 2 is when K is less than or equal
to R.
NOTE CONF
I don't even bother about qualifying whether it is greater
or less than L or not because less than L
NOTE CONF
is not possible, right?
It's not possible.
NOTE CONF
You cannot have K less than L.
So K so there are only two cases, K greater
NOTE CONF
than R and K less than or equal to R
that you will have to worry about.
NOTE CONF
Now, which case would be the next iteration?
K equals 3.
NOTE CONF
What is the R at?
The values that you know so far, yes sir.
NOTE CONF
Um, I was too It would be case one, isn't
it?
NOTE CONF
So you would have a case where, I'll just bring
this slide up.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to have two cases KK greater than
R K less or equal to R.
NOTE CONF
So.
So in general, when in case where K is greater
NOTE CONF
than R, you have no information that you can gain
from what you have computed before, just accept it as
NOTE CONF
an axiom for the moment and you'll see why that's
the case in a bit.
NOTE CONF
So there's nothing that what you've computed previously does not
inform anything um in the case one where K is
NOTE CONF
greater than R, which means that you have no other
choice but to do the naive algorithm.
NOTE CONF
So K letter with the first character in the prefix,
K + 1 with the second, K + 2 with
NOTE CONF
the third, until there's a mismatch.
Does, is that, does that make sense?
NOTE CONF
Now.
If you found some Z box of some length.
NOTE CONF
You have to obviously, if you found a Z box
of some length, the R value has to change, isn't
NOTE CONF
it?
So whatever, because you found a new Z box starting
NOTE CONF
at K.
Previously K was greater than R, the rightmost endpoint you've
NOTE CONF
seen previously, now you found a Z box.
The right would have to be updated because it's now
NOTE CONF
a Z box where the frontier has moved a little,
little ahead.
NOTE CONF
So if you found a mismatch at position Q, then
right has to be set at Q minus 1.
NOTE CONF
We'll see an example here.
So, out here, um, When K equals 3.
NOTE CONF
What is the ZK value if you do it explicitly?
Anyone, anyone who has not yet participated, time to.
NOTE CONF
What is ZK?
OK, 0 is what I saw in the audience.
NOTE CONF
So why is it 0?
You, what's the longest substring starting at 3 that matches
NOTE CONF
the prefix?
B does not match with an A.
NOTE CONF
There ends the matter, right?
So, well, because the Z3 did not really.
NOTE CONF
Improved that you didn't find any new Z box.
Your LNR remains unchanged.
NOTE CONF
Do you agree?
Because it's the same.
NOTE CONF
They have no update to that Z 3 equals 0.
Now, Z4 is equal to 0 and the loop variables
NOTE CONF
don't change.
Do you agree?
NOTE CONF
The state variables?
Z5 is a case where you would explicitly match and
NOTE CONF
find the 3.
Do you all agree?
NOTE CONF
So please follow this.
Yes, now you have to update.
NOTE CONF
are And the corresponding L, right?
Because previously it was 2.2, you found a Z box
NOTE CONF
at um at position 5 that ends at position 7.
So R is 7, L is 5.
NOTE CONF
That's what you've done.
Is, is it all clear?
NOTE CONF
So up until now, almost.
The penultimate case, so you've done there are only two
NOTE CONF
cases you've done case one.
Base case is, uh, explicit.
NOTE CONF
Case one is explicit.
If there is hope for a linear time algorithm, it
NOTE CONF
has to be, it better be in case two, otherwise
we are doomed.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, it's going to be a quadratic time algorithm.
Now let's actually think about case two.
NOTE CONF
Now What happens to case 2?
Case 2 is when K is less than or equal
NOTE CONF
to R.
Or in other words, it's within the Z box L
NOTE CONF
and R.
I did not ever even qualify.
NOTE CONF
The relationship with L because you can never have any
other relationship except for K if it is less than
NOTE CONF
equal to R, if it's less than the right most
that you've seen lesser or equal to what you've seen
NOTE CONF
previously, it has to be sandwiched between L and R.
It can never be less than L.
NOTE CONF
OK, so the case 3 that we saw on the
board, which I said it's not possible, which I think
NOTE CONF
convincingly you said it's not possible.
So if K is less than or equal to R.
NOTE CONF
So again, what's the goal here?
We want to find out what's the goal.
NOTE CONF
Think about the goal of this computation.
What do you want at the end of this this
NOTE CONF
iteration?
ZK value, right?
NOTE CONF
What is the relationship that you're looking for the longest
substring starting at K that matches the prefix, OK.
NOTE CONF
Now there is some information that you could glean.
Let's see what information you could glean now.
NOTE CONF
If This Z box, I'm just going to draw.
Uh, maybe a different colour.
NOTE CONF
If you have this Z box that you had previously
computed, so you agree that Z at L, so left
NOTE CONF
and left and right, left is pointing to 5, right
is pointing to 7, you're computing K equals 6.
NOTE CONF
You want to find out Z of K equals 6.
What is it, is what you're trying to estimate.
NOTE CONF
But you have Z 5.
Z5 is telling you a relationship between.
NOTE CONF
The substring starting at 5 and the prefix.
Do you all agree to that?
NOTE CONF
So this character mirrors the character.
Right?
NOTE CONF
So that's a relationship, right?
So the prefix relationship, this character mirrors that.
NOTE CONF
This character mirrors that.
So everything that you see in that box, there has
NOTE CONF
to be a prefix of that length that matches, that's
the definition of Z5.
NOTE CONF
Right?
Z6 is what you have to compute.
NOTE CONF
Now, Do you see that this position K is mirrored
by the position 2?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Do you see, at least by symmetry, visually, there is
NOTE CONF
a box from 5 to 7 that matches the region
1 to 3.
NOTE CONF
You want to find, you want to find out ZK
at 6.
NOTE CONF
It is mirroring some position in the prefix.
That position is position 2, OK?
NOTE CONF
Now I want you to do this a bit more
abstractly.
NOTE CONF
If I had L and R and some position K
for which I want to find the ZK value.
NOTE CONF
So can you tell me what would be the position
on the prefix side that mirrors index K?
NOTE CONF
With those variables.
I think you're right, but you're doing in zero ways.
NOTE CONF
Why is it K minus L + 1 in one-based?
I'm doing it a one-based indexing.
NOTE CONF
One No, no, but why is it K minus L?
Forget about the one word, but.
NOTE CONF
from Correct.
So if this whole substring is alpha, I'll go give
NOTE CONF
a variable, this whole region is also alpha.
The lengths have to be the same, right?
NOTE CONF
Which means that a position that is K, so this
is a position K, one base index, you have to
NOTE CONF
say how far is it from the left.
K minus L + 1 characters if you have, so
NOTE CONF
remember this, this, this formula is very important for you.
Start point.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so end point minus start point plus 1 equals
length.
NOTE CONF
All the arithmetic endpoint equals start point plus length minus
1.
NOTE CONF
Uh, length minus sorry, end point minus length plus 1
equals start point.
NOTE CONF
So they're basically rearrangements of this equation, right?
So I'm just rearranging this equation.
NOTE CONF
So what you're saying is this position K is some
characters from the start of that box that has to
NOTE CONF
be the same distance from the prefix because the relationships
have to line up right now it turns out.
NOTE CONF
In this example, In this example You're trying to find
K equals 6.
NOTE CONF
L and R are 5 to 7.
The thing that, so you have already computed Z the
NOTE CONF
Z value of its mirrored position previously.
You've already, you've come that far at position K equals
NOTE CONF
6.
Now you have to say, well, have I computed its
NOTE CONF
mirrored position on the perfect side if I've already have
this case sitting between some L and R.
NOTE CONF
The answer is yes, isn't it?
Have you computed Z2 previously?
NOTE CONF
Now, can that give us some information?
Remember, Z2 is a relationship between 2 and its prefix.
NOTE CONF
Z5 is a relationship between 5, the substring starting at
5 and it's prefix.
NOTE CONF
Now we want to find out Z6, which is the
relationship of, of, of substring starting at 6 with its
NOTE CONF
prefix.
Now can we.
NOTE CONF
Uh, find this relationship.
So, let's go back to the board before I bring
NOTE CONF
up the slide, because once you get the intuition, It
kind of becomes very easy.
NOTE CONF
There's a very Simple algorithm, to be honest, just that
it is simple in hindsight.
NOTE CONF
Like everything that is easy, it's because you've digested it.
OK?
NOTE CONF
It's hard when you don't.
So let's try and see, and I convince you that
NOTE CONF
this is much of this, what we're doing is elementary,
um, sort of, uh, relationships that we are going to
NOTE CONF
establish.
Um, OK, so let's do this.
NOTE CONF
So This is L, this is R of the string.
You're finding, or maybe I'll draw this slightly bigger, so
NOTE CONF
that I'm not strapped for space.
So this was a scenario that we were handling, right?
NOTE CONF
K was between was less than or equal to R,
which means that it has to be in between L
NOTE CONF
and R somewhere.
Now If The so this could position would be one.
NOTE CONF
I'm doing one base indexing so there would be some
region, some they're of slightly different lengths so let's get
NOTE CONF
the lens roughly right visually.
I'm just going to draw a box here.
NOTE CONF
Although this is not a Z box, it's a relationship
between the Z box starting at L with the, um,
NOTE CONF
I'll, I'll draw it as dashed boxes.
This is the relationship of the substring starting at L
NOTE CONF
with the prefix, right?
That's what I've drawn.
NOTE CONF
This is 1.
Where does this end?
NOTE CONF
There are many characters in between.
R minus L plus 1.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
OK, where, what would be that position here?
NOTE CONF
Is everyone getting the hang of conversions?
OK.
NOTE CONF
Now, If So I'm assuming, do you agree that everything
here is same as everything there?
NOTE CONF
If the whole matches, the parts have to match any
part, and its corresponding part has to match.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, so there's a symmetry between those two.
Now, if I computed the Z box previously at the
NOTE CONF
mirrored position, so I'm, so I'll go to, I'm going
to put this as red.
NOTE CONF
Because you want to find out what is ZK value.
Remember, there's a relationship of a substring starting at K
NOTE CONF
where K with 1 is matched if you have to
do it explicitly, K + 1 is, is matched with
NOTE CONF
2.
You're not doing it explicitly, you're just basing it on
NOTE CONF
what you've already computed here.
Now let's assume that you have computed a Z box
NOTE CONF
that is of some.
Length, what do we call, we call this length, which
NOTE CONF
is, we've not used up too many letters here.
Can we call the length uh S?
NOTE CONF
OK, let's say that length is S here.
Some length, if I, I can't use L because L
NOTE CONF
is taken.
Um, So if The length is S, that means that
NOTE CONF
there is some prefix.
Of the same length that this matches, right?
NOTE CONF
So this region.
Has to match this region if you know that these
NOTE CONF
two things are uh identical, right?
That's what Z Z of this value is equal to
NOTE CONF
S, let's say, OK, let's look at the diagram before
we look at the uh full detail, right?
NOTE CONF
Do you agree that If the whole thing was alpha,
the whole thing was alpha, that means L2R is alpha,
NOTE CONF
this has to be alpha as well, right?
So, this is alpha.
NOTE CONF
I'm just drawing it a dashed one because I don't
want you to think that this is a Z box.
NOTE CONF
It has a relationship with the prefix.
OK.
NOTE CONF
Alpha matches the prefix.
Similarly, this is also should be a dashed box here
NOTE CONF
because the Z box here matches the prefix of the
length S.
NOTE CONF
Now, by the definition of it uh by the relationship,
do you agree that this has to be, so if
NOTE CONF
this is beta.
If this substring is beta, do you agree that this
NOTE CONF
substring has to be beta?
Why?
NOTE CONF
the same Exact obvious, so I, I think much of
you are, are seeing it as obvious.
NOTE CONF
For those who it's not obvious, can you ask me,
can you raise your hands?
NOTE CONF
I'll explain to you why.
So the whole, this part is same as this part.
NOTE CONF
If the whole is the same, the corresponding parts have
to be the same, yeah.
NOTE CONF
Go on.
Assume that the the the the the Z region will
NOTE CONF
never.
Well, well, I've not yet said that.
NOTE CONF
I've, I've just said I've just drawn a beta to
be the substring of that length.
NOTE CONF
We'll talk about exceed or not exceeding a bit later.
Let's just intuit it so far.
NOTE CONF
So do you agree that if this is within this
region, let's assume that it is within this region.
NOTE CONF
OK, we'll talk about the exceeding part in a bit.
If it is contained, if that Z box is contained
NOTE CONF
inside that region.
If that's beta, beta is same as beta.
NOTE CONF
So, but alpha beta is, is a smaller part of
alpha, which means that there has to be this beta,
NOTE CONF
which is a smaller part of alpha on this side
as well.
NOTE CONF
Do you all agree to that statement?
Now, most importantly, now I want you to focus fully,
NOTE CONF
this is going to be a million dollar.
If this letter is some X, I can call it
NOTE CONF
any letter, there are variables.
What would be the letter here?
NOTE CONF
Can it be X?
The next letter Why Because it, it kind of defeats
NOTE CONF
the definition of the longest substring starting at that position.
So this has to be, these characters have to be
NOTE CONF
different.
So if it's X, then this character is sum Y
NOTE CONF
not equals X, right?
You all agree?
NOTE CONF
Now, if this character is X, what is this character?
Thanks.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, I, I hear X convincingly, and then some doubt.
Some people have asserted, willing to stake their honour at
NOTE CONF
X, so which, does anyone think it's not X, that
character?
NOTE CONF
Ha is So the whole thing is the same, which
means that whatever follows beta has to be the same
NOTE CONF
as whatever follows this beta here.
So this has to be X.
NOTE CONF
Now, what are we computing at K?
What is the longest substring starting at K that matches
NOTE CONF
the prefix?
What could it be?
NOTE CONF
So if this is beta, this is beta, this is
also beta.
NOTE CONF
Here it's beta followed by a Y, it's not equals
X.
NOTE CONF
Here's beta followed by X.
Here's a beta followed by X.
NOTE CONF
What would be a Z value at K?
The the length of beta, isn't it?
NOTE CONF
What is length of beer?
Now One of your classmates has pointed out.
NOTE CONF
A case where This beta could be longer.
So at least in the case where beta, so long
NOTE CONF
as the length of beta is less than some length,
this relationship.
NOTE CONF
Is this relationship holds OK.
What will be the maximum length of the relationship for
NOTE CONF
this relation to for this freeloading to happen where you
don't have to do any comparison the moment you have
NOTE CONF
k less than or equal to R and it's mirrored
position less than a certain length.
NOTE CONF
You can directly copy the value that you computed previously.
That is only true up to a certain point.
NOTE CONF
What is that point?
One of you could raise your hand.
NOTE CONF
OK, you, you go first.
When you are at or outer than the red box,
NOTE CONF
not just out of the red box.
So, so long as, so when you say Um, just
NOTE CONF
to be clear, there is this slack from K to
R.
NOTE CONF
So long as the Z box that you're computing in
the mirrored position is less than that width.
NOTE CONF
What is the width here?
R minus K + 1 is that width, OK?
NOTE CONF
Because that's the maximum you could go by copying.
Something, yeah.
NOTE CONF
Now, can beta be greater than that value?
And in fact, at this stage I'll just go to
NOTE CONF
the slide.
It becomes very, very clear now.
NOTE CONF
Let's actually reason this from the slide.
So what we have done here is when K was
NOTE CONF
between uh R and L and R, which is basically
K less than or equal to our case, what you
NOTE CONF
end up doing is the fact that you found that
those regions have to be the same.
NOTE CONF
On the prefix and suffix side, so K minus L
+ 1 would be the mirrored position of K.
NOTE CONF
You're trying to compute the value at K.
Now what you are then doing is that if you
NOTE CONF
have some value of Z box that you know of,
if that value of the Z box is less, so
NOTE CONF
now there are two cases here.
The case is when the length is less than R
NOTE CONF
minus K + 1.
R minus K + 1.
NOTE CONF
The width is end point minus start point plus 1,
right?
NOTE CONF
That is the same as that width.
If this beta, the length of the beta is less
NOTE CONF
than that width, which is the same as that width,
this width is same as that width, that's the reason
NOTE CONF
is this width is the same as that width.
Which means that this width has to be the same
NOTE CONF
as that.
Although it might be, the way I've drawn it might
NOTE CONF
not be um perfect to the closest millimetre, but you
get the point, right?
NOTE CONF
You get the point of what the symmetry, this whole
thing matches.
NOTE CONF
This has to be the same as that, the widths
have to be the same.
NOTE CONF
So what case to A is when you have ZK
minus L + 1, which is the Z box previously.
NOTE CONF
If that is less than the width, then You have
free computation.
NOTE CONF
OK?
Go back to the n squared first.
NOTE CONF
I, we have to prove why the order N in
a bit, but you already can see that you need
NOTE CONF
zero comparisons when that condition is met.
You just have to copy the value.
NOTE CONF
Do you change R&L?
Because your red box, the right has never exceeded.
NOTE CONF
So you never update uh RNL.
So now it turns out that in this example, this
NOTE CONF
is what we saw, if that's X, that's Y.
This is if that's X, that's X.
NOTE CONF
That's what we saw on the thing.
So when that's the case, when ZK becomes whatever we
NOTE CONF
computed previously on the mirrored position, RNL values become unchanged.
Is everyone clear with that?
NOTE CONF
I'm quite happy to stop and talk about it.
Yes, yes, ma'am.
NOTE CONF
Just asking what's.
It's exactly like what is it when we're like, for
NOTE CONF
example, like the K in 6, what does K actually
equal?
NOTE CONF
Um, so K is the loop variable where you're computing
the Z of K Z of K, like when we're
NOTE CONF
computing the like Z of K in the spot, like
is it a, is it some other number, is it
NOTE CONF
what we calculated before like in that spot where?
So let's look at the example here.
NOTE CONF
So if you were computing z of K at K
equals 6.
NOTE CONF
What it's asking you is to copy the value at
k minus L + 1.
NOTE CONF
So what is L here is 5.
K minus L + 1 would be 6 minus 5
NOTE CONF
+ 1, which is 2.s known as z of 2.
Zad of 2 would be the length of the longest
NOTE CONF
substring starting at 2 that matches the prefix, which is
1 here.
NOTE CONF
So which means that you're a set, you're already computed,
um, let me scribble on the slide, but for that
NOTE CONF
I need to.
So you would have computed Z2 equals 1 already, because
NOTE CONF
that was your base case, right?
So when you reach this place, you already have some
NOTE CONF
Z boxes already computed.
So Z2 equals 1 has been computed.
NOTE CONF
Now, to compute K, you've reached a scenario where ZK
minus L + 1 is less than R minus K
NOTE CONF
+ 1.
So can you see that this is equal to 1,
NOTE CONF
and this interval is 2.
So, 1 is less than 2, so it matches that,
NOTE CONF
that scenario.
So Z of K equals 6 becomes 1 because you've
NOTE CONF
just copied.
Does that answer your question?
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
Everyone clear?
NOTE CONF
OK.
So the only case remaining, and then we have finished
NOTE CONF
the algorithm, and then I have to convince ourselves that
it actually works.
NOTE CONF
So, the only case remaining is when it is greater
than or equal to, so I'll just go back to
NOTE CONF
the board.
So we can actually do.
NOTE CONF
So you're doing some LR And you have some K,
I'll draw K closer this time to R, the asymmetry
NOTE CONF
will help.
So that position end point would be the same as
NOTE CONF
that width, isn't it?
This width is the same as that width.
NOTE CONF
Because this Z box has to be the same as
the substring on the prefix side, OK?
NOTE CONF
If that's alpha, That's the same.
Now, this position.
NOTE CONF
Uh, minus L + 1.
So that would be the one that mirrors K.
NOTE CONF
I've drawn nothing different from what I have previously.
So how far is K from L is the same
NOTE CONF
of this index from 1.
OK.
NOTE CONF
This number of characters here, same as number of characters
there.
NOTE CONF
Now, the case that you're looking is when Um, Beta,
which is greater than the width.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Oh, so sorry.
NOTE CONF
I didn't even realise.
Sorry, I didn't even realise that.
NOTE CONF
So, are you with me so far?
So all I've done is I've drawn LNR and a
NOTE CONF
K that is 1, and the end point would be
R minus L + 1 because that width of here
NOTE CONF
is the same as the width of, of that thing.
And then K is mirroring that position here, K minus
NOTE CONF
L + 1.
Everything that we have done previously in case 2A.
NOTE CONF
Now beta is greater than or equal to.
In fact, we'll take the case.
NOTE CONF
I will let you.
In fact, greater than case is easier than equal to
NOTE CONF
case, so I'll do the harder case.
I'll let you reason the greater than case.
NOTE CONF
In your own time.
In fact, that's an assignment, uh sorry, that's your lab
NOTE CONF
question next week.
So do that think thinking in your self study.
NOTE CONF
I'll do the harder bit, right?
Let's say that it's exactly equal.
NOTE CONF
They both end at the same position.
OK.
NOTE CONF
So beta is that bit, which means that This is
not the Z box.
NOTE CONF
It is a substring beta, which is the same as
this, isn't it?
NOTE CONF
They have to be the same.
If, if this.
NOTE CONF
is bitter, this has to be bitter.
Do you agree?
NOTE CONF
It is not the Z box yet.
Do you all agree?
NOTE CONF
Because the whole thing is the same, the parts have
to be the same.
NOTE CONF
They're symmetric.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Are you following?
Now, if it's the same.
NOTE CONF
This part has to be bitter, right?
Because this relationship is same as this relationship.
NOTE CONF
Do you all agree?
Now If this character is X, I'm just going to
NOTE CONF
change, I'm going to call it some character beta followed
by an X.
NOTE CONF
This has to be some character that is not equals
X, right?
NOTE CONF
That is, the character at R minus L + 2
is some character not equals X.
NOTE CONF
Do you know why that's the case?
Everyone clear about that?
NOTE CONF
Why?
Yes, sir.
NOTE CONF
Yes, it, it flouts the definition of ZK minus L
+ 1.
NOTE CONF
It's the longest.
You've defined that it ends here because the characters after
NOTE CONF
that didn't match whenever you computed it, right?
Now What about character at R + 1?
NOTE CONF
With, so this position would be R minus L +
2, the 11 position after that, it's 2.
NOTE CONF
What about the relationships between those two?
Is that clear?
NOTE CONF
Are they the same, are they different, or don't know?
We don't know when they, when you have these relationships,
NOTE CONF
you know that these two characters are different.
You know these two characters are different, but we don't
NOTE CONF
know the relationship between that character and that character.
Do you see that?
NOTE CONF
So what would be the position here?
What would be the character position there?
NOTE CONF
It is a character after that width.
What's the width here?
NOTE CONF
R minus K plus 1 is the number of characters.
So that has to be R minus K + 2
NOTE CONF
in.
Because R minus K + 1 in one base indexing,
NOTE CONF
the next character after that would be R minus K
+ 2.
NOTE CONF
That would be the index.
So, you don't know if the string of R, it's
NOTE CONF
not a Z box, it's a string, string of at
that position.
NOTE CONF
Is it the same or different from R minus R
+ 1 and that are the same or not?
NOTE CONF
You don't know.
What you have to do is we know that the
NOTE CONF
Z box is at least as big.
It's going to be at least as big as this.
NOTE CONF
It is at least as big as R minus K
+ 1, which is that width.
NOTE CONF
But it has the question is whether it's greater than
or not comes by explicitly comparing that character and that
NOTE CONF
character.
The character, if they match that character and the character
NOTE CONF
after that until there is some mismatch at some position
Q.
NOTE CONF
So in fact what it's showing you is the scenario
where.
NOTE CONF
Um, I'll just bring up the slide.
The lecture theatre.
NOTE CONF
So you have to explicitly match after hour.
Everything you know that you get some information, not all
NOTE CONF
information, when they are exactly equal.
In fact, when it's greater than, you have more information
NOTE CONF
than when it's exactly equal.
You have to reason this, think about it.
NOTE CONF
Although in this algorithm I've handled it as explicit matching.
When it is greater than or equal to case in
NOTE CONF
principle you can break this down into.
Case 2B2B.1 and case 2B 0.2.
NOTE CONF
Case 2B.1 would be equal to case and case to
be 0.2 is greater than case.
NOTE CONF
What I reasoned was one of the two subcases, the
strictly greater than case actually.
NOTE CONF
Requires zero extra comparisons.
I'll give you the answer.
NOTE CONF
You only need to do extra comparisons when it's strictly
equals, strictly greater than you don't have to even worry.
NOTE CONF
But the fact that you're doing explicit comparison, if you
just set it up as greater than or equal to
NOTE CONF
rather than fine splitting it as less than, greater than,
and equal to cases or 3 cases instead of doing
NOTE CONF
the 3 cases, it has less than and greater or
equal to as it's set up in your slide.
NOTE CONF
You end up doing one extra comparison when it's greater
that's all that is all you end up doing um
NOTE CONF
per iteration.
So in this case you have to explicitly compare only
NOTE CONF
after R.
Can you see that all the comparisons explicit are never
NOTE CONF
less than R is always at positions greater than R.
So if that's the case, then R gets pushed a
NOTE CONF
little further.
Now in this case, if you compare R + 1,
NOTE CONF
R + 2 R + 3 positions from positions uh
R minus K + 2 R minus K + 3
NOTE CONF
R minus K + 4, and so on until you
find the mismatch, then your new R would be if
NOTE CONF
it ends at position Q, the new R would be
at Q minus 1 wherever.
NOTE CONF
The last match was found L would have been where
it started.
NOTE CONF
Now, the, the trick here is you are saving on
that part of the computation.
NOTE CONF
That part of the computation you don't have to match
because you're already previously have done that matches.
NOTE CONF
You've gained that information partially from the Z box here.
OK, that that black part is what you're kind of,
NOTE CONF
you know, that relationship holds.
Now think about this, this case is the only tricky
NOTE CONF
case we will have a few tries to understand this.
So tomorrow come to the um structured consultations or come
NOTE CONF
on Thursday, any one of them if you don't understand
in Tuesday you can come on Thursday both times, but
NOTE CONF
join me in the Zoom session.
I'll post some.
NOTE CONF
Um, some, um, uh, Zoom links in the, in the
E forum so that you can, it's convenient for you
NOTE CONF
to attend.
We'll work out more examples to gain their intuition.
NOTE CONF
Don't give up.
Don't say, well, it's hard, uh, it's hard.
NOTE CONF
I can't do it.
Just try and, and persist, and we'll, we'll get through
NOTE CONF
some more examples and see if it all agrees.
So if we move on, yes sir.
NOTE CONF
I said the.
I think it's it's because you have more information, you
NOTE CONF
almost from the information of greater than, you definitely know
that the characters won't match.
NOTE CONF
Why?
I will let you think tonight, come and find me
NOTE CONF
tomorrow, and then we'll we'll solve this tomorrow, tomorrow during
the workshop.
NOTE CONF
All right.
Um, so this is what this, um, um, this algorithm
NOTE CONF
does.
So I've got some special cases, uh, examples that continue.
NOTE CONF
So will not work out.
So if, if you went that strictly equals, you don't
NOTE CONF
know the relationship.
Afterwards you only compare from R + 1 onwards, so
NOTE CONF
what you end up doing is comparing um uh the
stuff you kind of have some information that's missing that
NOTE CONF
you kind of can't, you don't know the relationship between
this character that's variable Y and this character that's variable
NOTE CONF
um uh uh variable Z.
So Y and Z's relationship that remains unclear.
NOTE CONF
I think I've used slightly different variables on the board.
Reason this if you don't understand it, that's perfectly fine
NOTE CONF
at this stage it's perfectly fine.
Come to the workshop tomorrow, we'll work out this in
NOTE CONF
a bit more detail at, at the, at this level.
Try and take it as something that is true, work
NOTE CONF
out why it's true based on the explanation that I
have, we'll have a second chance at explaining it a
NOTE CONF
bit more clearly.
All right, so.
NOTE CONF
So you kind of do the uh comparisons.
There are some examples here that essentially go through the
NOTE CONF
case to be where in this case, it turns out
that Um This position is being mirrored by that position
NOTE CONF
and then you realise that um the the um ZK
value so yeah so it it just turns out that
NOTE CONF
um.
They're of the same length.
NOTE CONF
Z boxes are the same length, so you end up
saying that, well, that has to be the same as
NOTE CONF
that.
You have to explicitly compare that character, that same that
NOTE CONF
character, and here there is a mismatch, and that gives
you a miss so you only have to compare from
NOTE CONF
right + 1, right + 2, right + 3, after
the positions that after the width that it's matched that
NOTE CONF
width the same as that width the same as that
width.
NOTE CONF
You're comparing after those positions.
C matches with a C.
NOTE CONF
A matches with an A, uh, but B does not
match with a Y, so you end up getting R
NOTE CONF
as 17 because you mismatched at position 18.
L would be 13, and then you move on.
NOTE CONF
There are just work through this example, just reason this
example as I said, and see where you go.
NOTE CONF
Now I just wanted to sort of in the last,
there's some self-study questions for you go through that during
NOTE CONF
self study.
Self study is important in this in in this unit,
NOTE CONF
so spend some time thinking about it.
Don't wait until the assignments are released to catch up.
NOTE CONF
That's not optimal.
We are doing an algorithms course that's about efficient learning.
NOTE CONF
There's an efficient way of learning as well, right?
By coming, coming to doing these promptly.
NOTE CONF
Anyway, so I will be quite pleased.
I just, there are some um iterations which are basically
NOTE CONF
going to be case 1, case 2A, case 2B.
Just go through those cases and see if you agree
NOTE CONF
with this example.
I've covered the three cases that are important.
NOTE CONF
Now why is this there are few things quiet few
things, and we will kind of reason.
NOTE CONF
The reason, reason for why this is linear time is
very, very simple.
NOTE CONF
Now if you reason this from the point of view
of worst case in every.
NOTE CONF
Iteration, you will pessimistically derive an n squared bound because
in the worst case you're doing explicit matching, in the
NOTE CONF
worst case, and your K iterations, if uh sorry if
that string is of length N they are N iterations,
NOTE CONF
and each of them you're doing explicit, so that would
be N squared, right?
NOTE CONF
That would be a trivial bound.
This is a new form of complexity analysis where you're
NOTE CONF
not making pessimistic bounds on each iteration to find the
worst case.
NOTE CONF
You're doing what's called an aggregate analysis.
Overall, what are, what is the effort it takes overall,
NOTE CONF
all the iterations, not one iteration and multiplying it by
the worst case.
NOTE CONF
If there are any iterations, worst case end, that will
be N squared, that's a pessimistic bound upper bound.
NOTE CONF
It's upper bound, sure, but it's a pessimistic upper bound.
Now what would be a more true upper bound, a
NOTE CONF
realistic upper bound is what we're computing.
So the total time is proportional to to what are
NOTE CONF
the things that uh add up.
You, you have a bunch of, uh, iterations in which
NOTE CONF
you are matching some characters and you're mismatching some characters,
right?
NOTE CONF
So what I want to find out is the total
bound on number of matches and number of mismatches overall
NOTE CONF
overall the iterations.
So what are the moving parts?
NOTE CONF
There are 3 moving parts, the, the number of iterations.
The number of explicit character match matching.
NOTE CONF
So how many times have you matched explicitly?
When you match explicitly, you either match when they're they
NOTE CONF
are the same, that is a matching, and when there's
a mismatch.
NOTE CONF
There are two things, right?
There are two, when you do uh explicit character comparisons,
NOTE CONF
you can either match or mismatch.
So now what we are saying, do you all agree
NOTE CONF
that there are N minus 1 iterations in this algorithm?
Z1 is free, Z2, Z3, Z4, Z5, that the iteration
NOTE CONF
K goes from 2 to N.
Right?
NOTE CONF
So there are N minus 1 iterations.
Do you all agree that the total number of mismatches
NOTE CONF
has to be bounded by the number of iterations?
Because each iteration has to end in the worst case
NOTE CONF
in a mismatch.
You can only have one mismatch, you stop the iteration,
NOTE CONF
right?
The number of mismatches has to be bounded by a
NOTE CONF
number of iterations.
So of three things iterations, mismatches, and matches, we know
NOTE CONF
that number of iterations is order N, number of mismatches
is order N.
NOTE CONF
Now if I can prove that number of matches, total
number of matches in explicit comparison is bounded by order
NOTE CONF
N, then we have the complexity overall, which is ON
plus ON plus ON, which is going to be ON.
NOTE CONF
Now let's see why that's the case.
The number of matches is utmost order in, because I'll
NOTE CONF
pause here, anyone?
Um, because you don't, uh, you don't see.
NOTE CONF
So very well said.
The intuition is correct.
NOTE CONF
So they look at, let's do the reason this clearly.
This is linked to the R values.
NOTE CONF
R values that you compute at any iteration has to
be the same or greater than what you computed previously.
NOTE CONF
Do you all agree to that?
Do you ever compare anything before R at any iteration?
NOTE CONF
You always compute R.
Now think about a string, a width interval from 1
NOTE CONF
tonne, and there are r values that have to cover
that distance whenever you're comparing.
NOTE CONF
Matching our value increases, right, from 1 all the way
towards N.
NOTE CONF
The worst it can increase to would be N, the
width of the interval.
NOTE CONF
The total number of matches because of this monotonicity, so
I'll just, you update RK as whatever RK minus 1
NOTE CONF
plus delta, where delta is greater than equal to 0.
The width of delta in the worst case is.
NOTE CONF
Order N right?
is the width of the uh how far can how
NOTE CONF
many times can you, what's the largest you could increase
any box end of the string once your box has
NOTE CONF
been increased, you never go back and compare again you
only are doing it after that so total number of
NOTE CONF
matches is bounded by order.
And so every because of every RK is less than
NOTE CONF
or equal to N, what you end up having is
at most N matches because you never do explicit matches
NOTE CONF
before R.
You only do explicit matches after R and R is
NOTE CONF
going from 1 towards N.
The maximum it can go is the width itself order
NOTE CONF
N.
So that would basically be the reasoning of why this
NOTE CONF
algorithm runs in order in time.
This is also a cute question.
NOTE CONF
You will have a time to process this in a
much more leisurely paced with your tutors.
NOTE CONF
So none of these are the final statements, right?
So this is the first impression in the seminar.
NOTE CONF
Come, this is an important, it's an important impression.
Come to the seminar, get the gist, think about it.
NOTE CONF
Form some opinion, go back to the lab, crystallise it.
That is how you learn most effectively.
NOTE CONF
Now I've got the last 5 minutes and that's all
I need to take to use this to drive home
NOTE CONF
a linear time pattern matching problem.
Now for those who haven't yet seen the slide.
NOTE CONF
How can you, for those who haven't yet seen the
slide, if you've seen the slide, it's cheating, don't answer.
NOTE CONF
But for those who haven't, how can you use this
to drive the pattern matching problem where you're given a
NOTE CONF
text to find all occurrences of a pattern, you've given
a text in the pattern, find all occurrences of the
NOTE CONF
pattern in the text.
How would you do it?
NOTE CONF
Anyone wants to go?
I have one hand there.
NOTE CONF
Anyone else who wants to go?
OK, all right, I'll give you a chance.
NOTE CONF
Attached to OK, let me do this.
The statement that that's coming from the audience is.
NOTE CONF
You have given Um You have a text.
1 tonne.
NOTE CONF
That's the text.
You said, attach.
NOTE CONF
Attach the pattern you meant prepend the pattern.
1 to M.
NOTE CONF
That's the pattern.
That's what you wanted me to do.
NOTE CONF
With You want to have a separator?
What do you, let's call the separator $1.
NOTE CONF
OK, dollar doesn't exist in the alphabet.
It could, if it exists in the alphabet, it's something
NOTE CONF
else.
In fact, you don't even need a separator.
NOTE CONF
You can actually do, do that without the separator.
But let's go with the version which has a separator.
NOTE CONF
Then what?
So you have one string which is 1 to N,
NOTE CONF
which is the text.
Another string which is 1 to M.
NOTE CONF
So what's the size of this total?
N + M + 1, right?
NOTE CONF
Because you have one separator.
OK.
NOTE CONF
So, this string is going to be 12 N plus.
M + 1, yeah.
NOTE CONF
And then what?
So that's, that's what the string is.
NOTE CONF
String equals.
And then what?
NOTE CONF
And then that algorithm, why would, why would that work?
Uh Because general open will try to do.
NOTE CONF
So Anyone, anyone wants to, yes, sir?
No OK, so you compute Z algorithm of the string.
NOTE CONF
It gives you some z values, so you get some
z values, Z values associated with this.
NOTE CONF
Which Z values am I interested in?
But starting what index?
NOTE CONF
The M and M + 2, maybe if you're starting
from 1.
NOTE CONF
OK.
From the text, so essentially the text part of, of
NOTE CONF
the Z values.
If any ZK value equals M, what does it mean?
NOTE CONF
That means that there exists a substring.
That matches the prefix of length m.
NOTE CONF
Which implies there exists a pattern as a substring of
the text.
NOTE CONF
The complexity of we, if we have agreed that the
complexity of computing this is bigger of N + M
NOTE CONF
+ 1, you have a linear time algorithm to compute
the exact pattern matching problem.
NOTE CONF
Now, That is all there is to it.
By the way, if I don't have the separator here,
NOTE CONF
how, how, what, what change do I have to make
to the code?
NOTE CONF
If I don't have the separator there, if I don't
have that extra character, yes sir.
NOTE CONF
OK, that's one change.
If I didn't have the separator, I have to go
NOTE CONF
from M + 1, and then what?
Z value can be greater than or equal to m.
NOTE CONF
So you're not searching for strictly equal to m.
You're, you're also checking for something that is greater than
NOTE CONF
equal to, yes, sir.
make it slightly faster.
NOTE CONF
You guarantee that you're not gonna.
Yes, um, it does make things because you get, you
NOTE CONF
have, but it in, in constant as a constant factor
but a constant additive rather than anything major, so it's
NOTE CONF
going to be plus some constant and maybe in the
worst case be a constant factor, yeah, but yes, it
NOTE CONF
will make it slightly faster if you had a unique
separator.
NOTE CONF
You then have this problem of what would be a
separator if I use dollar as my alphabet in my
NOTE CONF
alphabet of uh that's drawing, then you have to find
something to define a terminal.
NOTE CONF
But anyway, so that's basically um the Z algorithm.
So we are close to the end of this lecture
NOTE CONF
now.
I just wanted to say, please, please do the self-study.
NOTE CONF
This is important.
Come tomorrow if some parts of this I'm pretty sure
NOTE CONF
is not fully crystallised, and this is expected, this will
happen week after week, but come tomorrow, just mull over
NOTE CONF
it.
Even if you haven't had the time, come to the
NOTE CONF
workshop tomorrow.
If you can't come on Tuesday, come on Thursday.
NOTE CONF
I will work out examples, have more number of iterations
thinking about this before you go into your labs.
NOTE CONF
But do your lab questions, because if you don't understand
that algorithm, by the time you do Boom more, then
NOTE CONF
you will miss Boom more, OK?
So do it.
NOTE CONF
Yes, you have a question, ma'am?
Yes, the workshop, well, technically starts starting week 2, but
NOTE CONF
I will be doing it starting.